Update conclusion episode (#32)
escience-academy/Lesson-FAIR-Data-Climate: _episodes/conclusion.md

teaching: 0
exercises: 0
questions:
- "How can I assess the FAIRness of my data?"
- "What do I do now to improve the FAIRness of my data?"
objectives:
- "Relate each FAIRification practice with FAIR principles."

> - "Know about available tools/resources for assessing FAIRness of your data."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- "Be aware of available tools/resources for assessing FAIRness of your data."
```

- "Understand the next steps you can take to improve FAIRness of your data."
keypoints:
- "FAIRification practices are about documentation, metadata, file formats, access to data,
persistent identifiers, and data licenses."

> - "FAIR will change the way we do science."

Reviewer: I find this keypoint a bit too dreamy, how about:

```suggestion
- "The FAIR principles provide clear handles on data management in the movement towards open and sustainable science."
```

> - "FAIR brings all the stakeholders together."

Reviewer: I guess here you want to say something about how the FAIR principles affect everyone, from top to bottom, how about:

```suggestion
- "The FAIR principles promote maximum use of research data, involving all the stakeholders from data producers to funding agencies."
```

---

## FAIRification practices and FAIR principles

We discussed each FAIRification practice, i.e. documentation, metadata, file formats, access to data,
persistent identifiers, and data licenses.
We also explained what a FAIRification practice means in a FAIR context. In summary:

> > ## You make your research data findable by:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> ## Make your research findable
```

>

> > ![findable]({{ page.root }}/fig/findable.jpg)

Reviewer: Do we not have higher resolution images? These are a bit grainy.

> > ![findable]({{ page.root }}/fig/findable.jpg)

Reviewer: I like the figures, but I'm not a huge fan of this layout. It would be nice if we could have the figure on the left, and then the points right next to them, but I guess that is difficult to do with the template. Howe about we just have a row of these images at the top or the bottom of this section?

>

> > - publishing your **data** and/or **metadata** in a searchable resource such as a repository

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - Publish your **data** and/or **metadata** in a searchable resource such as a repository
```

>   that assigns a **persistent identifier**.

> > - including rich accurate machine-readable descriptive **metadata** and keywords to your data,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - Include rich accurate machine-readable descriptive **metadata** and keywords to your data,
```

>   preferably according to your community standards.
>
{: .checklist}

> > ## You make your research data accessible by:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> ## Make your data acessible
```

>
> ![accessible]({{ page.root }}/fig/accessible.jpg)
>

> > - attaching a **data license** or clear data accessibility statement in your openly available administrative metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - Attach a **data license** or clear data accessibility statement in your openly available administrative metadata.
```

> > - ensuring your data are archived in long-term storage and retrievable by their **persistent identifier** using a standard protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - Ensure your data are archived in long-term storage and retrievable by their **persistent identifier** using a standard protocol.
```

> > - giving **access** to the **metadata**, even if the data are closed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - Give **access** to the **metadata**, even if the data are closed.
```

{: .checklist}

> > ## You make your research data interoperable by:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> ## Make your data interoperable
```

>
> ![interoperable]({{ page.root }}/fig/interoperable.jpg)
>

> > - including sufficient and structural **metadata** in accordance with your research community’s standards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - Include sufficient and structural **metadata** in accordance with your research community’s standards.
```

> > - using common standards, terminologies, vocabularies, and ontologies for the data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - Use common standards, terminologies, vocabularies, and ontologies for the data.
```

> > - preferring open, long-term viable **file formats** for your data and metadata.

Reviewer: long-term viable -> sustainable?

```suggestion
> - Prefer open, long-term viable **file formats** for your data and metadata.
```

{: .checklist}

> > ## You make your research data reusable by:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> ## Make your data reusable
```

>
> ![reusable]({{ page.root }}/fig/reusable.jpg)
>

> > - attaching all the relevant contextual information in either the **documentation** or **metadata**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - Attach all the relevant contextual information in either the **documentation** or **metadata**.
```

> > - including sufficient and structural **metadata** in accordance with your research community’s standards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - Include sufficient and structural **metadata** in accordance with your research community’s standards.
```

> > - preferring open, long-term viable **file formats** for your data and metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - Prefer open, long-term viable **file formats** for your data and metadata.
```

> > - applying a machine-readable **data license**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - Apply a machine-readable **data license**.
```

{: .checklist}

*The images of FAIR principles are created by Scriberia for The Turing Way community and
is used under a CC-BY license. Source: <https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3695300>*

## Assessing FAIRness

> FAIR is a journey. A FAIR assessment now is a snapshot in time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
FAIR is a journey. The FAIR principles are guidelines. A FAIR assessment now is a snapshot in time.
```

Nevertheless, individuals and communities look to how FAIR their data are.
The reasons are various, including gaining a better understanding and making improvements.
Ultimately, an assessment can be a helpful guide on the path to becoming more FAIR.

The following are some resources and tools to help you get started.

- [FAIR-Aware](https://fairaware.dans.knaw.nl/) assessment tool.
- [Zenodo overview](https://about.zenodo.org/principles/) of how the service responds to the FAIR principles.
- A list of resources for the assessment of digital objects provided by [FAIRassist](https://fairassist.org/#!/).

> - [Mirror, mirror on the wall, who is the FAIRest one of all?](https://forschungsdaten-thueringen.de/entry/mirror-mirror-on-the-wall-tkfdm-announces-fairest-dataset-award.html).

Reviewer: 'Mirror, mirror on the wall, who is the FAIRest one of all?'
🤦‍♂️

```suggestion
- [Mirror, mirror on the wall, who is the FAIRest one of all?](https://forschungsdaten-thueringen.de/entry/mirror-mirror-on-the-wall-tkfdm-announces-fairest-dataset-award.html)
```

- [The Australian Research Data Commons’ FAIR data self-assessment tool](https://ardc.edu.au/resources/working-with-data/fair-data/fair-self-assessment-tool/).

## Improving FAIRness

We provided recommendations, examples of steps you can take before, during and after your research project

> to make your research data more FAIR. FAIR sounds like a lot of work. However, you can get started by:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to make your research data more FAIR. FAIR sounds like a lot of work. However, here is how you can get started:
```

> - understanding how FAIR translates to your field/community.
> - using standards that are common to your field/community.
> - collaborating with other communities to define a relevant metadata scheme/standards.
> - checking the requirements of the repository where data is stored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Understand how FAIR translates to your field/community.
- Use standards that are common to your field/community.
- Collaborate with other communities to define a relevant metadata scheme/standards.
- Check the requirements of the repository where data is stored.
```
